alright here's an intro to how this
works one of the things that you're
going to need to really get the most out
of watercolor painting in Photoshop is a
decent blending tool one of the things
that people have begged for in Photoshop
for years is something that'll really
let you blend color on the canvas
Photoshop cs5 has a color mixer brush
that takes up all of your RAM and all of
your CPU all at the same time and even
that that doesn't really do any better a
job than a really simple tool that you
can make using the smudge tool which is
already in Photoshop or earlier versions
of Photoshop the smudge tool the way
that it comes out of the factory in its
default setting is generally agreed upon
to be useless but I have discovered that
it's really not that difficult to turn
it into something pretty useful and I
can't really take credit for that I
learned about that through the wonderful
natural media plug-in that is I can show
you that's known as nks 3 and I'm going
to include a link to that in the in the
annotations because it is a fabulous
collection of free tools that you can
put into Photoshop that includes a
really nice blender and because this is
based on Photoshop actions and really
simple tool presets you can reverse
engineer how to make a good blender so
if you want to make a good blender you
use this much tool you use a very very
simple round airbrush just a soft
airbrush the brush tip shape is round
it's zero percent hardness the but
here's the key part you want to turn on
scattering because what that will do is
avoid the kind of smearing look that the
smudge tool usually brings if you have
scattering on and it looks sort of
pebble II like this then I will show you
what this looks like normally so that
you'll get a sense of what it's really
doing because
this blender is going to be very
important for doing some of the
wet-in-wet looks that we want to see in
watercolor so I'm just going to take a
couple of colors and I'm going to put
them side-by-side so that you can see
the efficacy of this blender I'm gonna
zoom in a little bit more we have our
blender and you can see it works very
quickly it it blends for most purposes
very well it's not ideal it isn't
perfectly smooth but it works very very
well
pretty much well enough for anything
that we want to do here and frankly the
roughness that that it lends to the
blending is going to be an asset when we
get into the kind of course look of
watercolor so create a blender create a
tool preset I use the one right route of
an ks3 Club blend fast and you're going
to be in business all right now let's
start with the technique proper you can
open up a new Photoshop document it
doesn't matter what size and what you're
going to do is make sure that you have a
white background because if the
background is transparent than the
watercolors won't have anything to be up
against then create a new group it'll be
color group one then what you're going
to do is create a mask for the entire
group you're going to create a mask and
it's not going to be just for one layer
but it's going to be just for the group
right now this group doesn't have
anything in it it's an empty group I
have selected the mask itself and now
what I'm going to do is fill the mask
with a watercolor paper texture that I
really like this comes right out of the
default paper presets there it's just a
default Photoshop pattern and it's
called gouache light on watercolor to me
this is just the best thing and I'm
going to hit OK
now Photoshop patterns are grayscale and
in masking white means that the layer
shows through and black means that the
layer is the black parts are the parts
that are obscured so if we look at
channels this is just to show you what's
going on underneath when you have a mask
on you can't see what's happening so if
you look when I turn this on and off you
can see a very subtle kind of pebbly
texture coming through if I were to
create a layer and fill it with this
texture all by itself it'll give you a
better idea of what it looks like this
is the texture that exists on that mask
you can see it looks a lot like
watercolor paper it has a kind of fiber
texture it isn't too gnarly but I think
that this is almost a little bit too
dark and because dark in masking is
going to obscure things I'd like to use
levels to lighten it up I want to I want
to bring the brightness of this mask up
because that will help what is within
the contents to show through a little
bit better so I'm going to select the
mask I can get rid of this layer now
because it was just to show you what it
looks like select the layer mask here
and open levels you can hit control L if
you like keyboard shortcuts bringing the
white down so that it doesn't take as
much for what's underneath to come
through as white and if you look very
very carefully you can see that the
layer mask is getting brighter than when
I started so if you look at it now and
now when I bring the right-most white
arrow closer to the middle watch
carefully
when I let go it becomes whiter
it really does not take too much
careful flexing just bring the white a
little bit closer to the middle and you
should be fine good okay and now create
a layer that's going to be inside this
group you can call this watercolor call
it watercolor one hit okay and now you
want to set the blending mode for your
new layer to multiply because this is
going to be a transparent layer and you
don't want anything that is on this
layer to be opaque relative to anything
underneath it for example if I have a
line drawing and in fact I will do a
little quick sketch to give me something
to color in I have a layer on outside of
my watercolor group here I'm just going
to do a quick little pencil drawing to
give you an idea of what we're going to
be coloring in I'm just going to draw a
box so if you want to do a pencil
drawing or if you have scanned a pencil
drawing and you want to watercolor over
it you don't want your watercolors to be
opaque so when you're inside your
watercolor group here you want to set
your layer blending mode to multiply and
anytime you create a new layer here
you're going to want to set your layer
mode